sairandhryāstadanu ciraṃ smarāturāyā
yāto'bhū: sulalitamuddhavena sārdham |
āvāsaṃ tvadupagamotsavaṃ sadaiva
dhyāyantyā: pratidinavāsasajjikāyā: ||1||
sairandhryā:-	of Sairandhree (the female who gave Thee unguents)
tadanu ciraṃ	thereafter, since long
smara-āturāyā	by Kaama Deva who was afflicted
yāta:-abhū:	(Thou) went
sulalitam-	well adorned
uddhavena sārdham	with Uddhava
āvāsaṃ	to (her) house
tvat-upagama-utsavaṃ	Thy arriving festival
sadā-eva	always alone
dhyāyantyā:	she was thinking of
pratidina-vāsa-sajjikāyā:	(and so) everyday adorned herself and decorated her house
Thou went well adorned with Uddhava to the house of Sairandhree, the female attendant who had given Thee unguents and was long stricken with love for Thee. She was thinking of Thee every day and adorned herself and decorated her house everyday in the expectation of the festive event of meeting Thee.
upagate tvayi pūrṇamanorathāṃ pramadasambhramakamprapayodharām |
vividhamānanamādadhatīṃ mudā rahasi tāṃ ramayāñcakṛṣe sukham ||2||
upagate tvayi	at Thy arrival
pūrṇamanorathām	her wish fulfilled
pramada-sambhrama-	with joy and excitement
kampra-payodharām	whose breasts were quivering
vividha-mānanam-	various honours
ādadhatīṃ mudā	who was offering joyfully
rahasi tāṃ	secretly to her
ramayān-cakṛṣe	(Thou) delighted her
sukham	happily
At Thy arrival, all her wishes were fulfilled and she joyfully honoured Thee with various offerings, with her breasts heaving in excitement. Thou happily delighted her in privacy.
pṛṣṭā varaṃ punarasāvavṛṇodvarākī
bhūyastvayā suratameva niśāntareṣu |
sāyujyamastviti vadet budha eva kāmaṃ
sāmīpyamastvaniśamityapi nābravīt kim ||3||
pṛṣṭā varaṃ	asked what boon she wanted
puna:-asau-	then at that time, this (pitiable woman)
avṛṇot-varākī	asked for, the pitiable one
bhūya:-tvayā	again with Thee
suratam-eva	enjoyment only
niśā-antareṣu	on other nights
sāyujyam-astu-	let me have union with Thee
iti vadet budha eva	thus will say an enlightened one only
kāmaṃ	definitely
sāmīpyam-astu-aniśam-	let me have nearness with Thee always
iti-api-	thus also
na-abravīt kim	did not say, how come (why)
When she was asked by Thee as to what boon she wanted, the stupid woman prayed that she may get to enjoy in the same manner with Thee on other nights also. Indeed only an enlightened person will ask for 'Saayujya' (becoming one with Thee) liberation. But at least she could ask for 'Saamipya' (being always close to Thee). How come she did not ask for even that!
tato bhavān deva niśāsu kāsucinmṛgīdṛśaṃ tāṃ nibhṛtaṃ vinodayan |
adādupaśloka iti śrutaṃ sutaṃ sa nāradāt sāttvatatantravidbababhau ||4||
tata: bhavān deva	then, Thou O Effulgent One!
niśāsu kāsucit-	on some nights
mṛgīdṛśaṃ tāṃ nibhṛtaṃ	her, the doe eyed one, in secret
vinodayan adāt-	giving delight, gave
upaśloka iti	Upashloka named
śrutaṃ sutaṃ	well known son
sa nāradāt	he (the son) from Naarada
sāttvata-tantra-vid babhau	in the (knowledge of) Saatvata Tantra became well versed
O Lord! Subsequently Thou on some nights delighted the doe eyed one in secret. Thou gave her a son who came to be well known as Upashloka. He learnt the knowledge in Saattvat Tantra from Naarada and shone as an exponent there of.
akrūramandiramito'tha baloddhavābhyā-
mabhyarcito bahu nuto muditena tena |
enaṃ visṛjya vipināgatapāṇḍaveya-
vṛttaṃ viveditha tathā dhṛtarāṣṭrceṣṭām ||5||
akrūra-mandiram-	to Akrura's house
ita:-atha	going then
bala-uddhavābhyām-	with Balaraama and Uddhava
abhyarcita: bahu nuta:	honoured (and) very much praised
muditena tena	by him (Akrura) who was very delighted
enaṃ visṛjya	him (Akrura) sending away
vipina-āgata-	from the forest having returned
pāṇḍaveya-vṛttaṃ	the Paandava's news
viveditha tathā	come to know and
dhṛtarāṣṭra-ceṣṭām	Dhritaraashtraa's doings
Thou went with Balaraama and Uddhava to Akrura's house. Akrura received Thee with high honours and worshipped Thee with hymns. Thou sent away Akrura to gather the news of the Pandavaas who had returned from the forest and also news about Dhritaraashtra's doings.
vighātājjāmātu: paramasuhṛdo bhojanṛpate-
rjarāsandhe rundhatyanavadhiruṣāndhe'tha mathurām |
rathādyairdyorlabdhai: katipayabalastvaṃ balayuta-
strayoviṃśatyakṣauhiṇi tadupanītaṃ samahṛthā: ||6||
vighātāt-jāmātu:	by the slaying of the son in law
parama-suhṛda:	and great friend
bhoja-nṛpate:-	the king of Bhoja (Kansa)
jarāsandhe rundhati-	when Jaraasandha besieged (Mathura)
anavadhi-ruṣā-andhe-	blinded by unbounded rage
atha mathurām	then Mathura
ratha-ādyai:-dyo:-labdhai:	with the chariot etc.from the heaven obtained
katipaya-bala:-tvaṃ	with a few soldiers, Thou
bala-yuta:-	along with Balaraama
traya:-viṃśati-akṣauhiṇi	23 akshauhini (army)
tat-upanītaṃ samahṛthā:	brought by him, destroyed
Jaraasandha was blinded with rage when his friend and son in law Kansa was killed. He besieged Mathura. Along with Balaraama, and a few soldiers, chariot and charioteer called from heaven Thou destroyed his army of 23 Akshauhini brought by him.
baddhaṃ balādatha balena balottaraṃ tvaṃ
bhūyo balodyamarasena mumocithainam |
niśśeṣadigjayasamāhṛtaviśvasainyāt
ko'nyastato hi balapauruṣavāṃstadānīm ||7||
baddhaṃ balāt-atha	tied up forcefully then
balena balottaraṃ	by Balaraama (him) who was of extraordinary strength
tvaṃ bhūya:	Thou again
bala-udyama-rasena	wanting (him Jaraasandha) to come back with an army to fight
mumocitha-enaṃ	released him
niśśeṣa-dik-	of all the directions
jaya-samāhṛta-	conquering and obtaining
viśva-sainyāt	the many armies
ka:-anya:-tata: hi	who else than him indeed
bala-pauruṣavān-	more strong and powerful
tadānīm	at that time
Jaraasandha of extraordinary strength was forcefully tied up by Balaraama. Thou wanted him to come back with an army, so Thou released him. At that time there was no one more powerful than him for having conquered all the kings in all the directions and who commandeered their armies.
bhagna: sa lagnahṛdayo'pi nṛpai: praṇunno
yuddhaṃ tvayā vyadhita ṣoḍaśakṛtva evam |
akṣauhiṇī: śiva śivāsya jaghantha viṣṇo
sambhūya saikanavatitriśataṃ tadānīm ||8||
bhagna: sa	broken, he
lagna-hṛdaya:-api	and with a defeated heart also
nṛpai: praṇunna:	by the kings prompted
yuddhaṃ tvayā vyadhita	battled (he) with Thee
ṣoḍaśakṛtva:-evaṃ	thus 16 times
akṣauhiṇī:	(with) Akshauhini armies
śiva śiva-asya	what a wonder, of his
jaghantha	destroyed
viṣṇo	O All Pervading Lord!
sambhūya	altogether
sa-eka-navati-triśataṃ	one and three hundred ninety times (391)
tadānīm	then (in the battles)
He was broken hearted and humiliated by defeat in the battle. He attacked Thee sixteen times prompted by the smaller kings. O Vishnu! Thou destroyed 391 of his Akshauhini armies altogether. What a wonder!
aṣṭādaśe'sya samare samupeyuṣi tvaṃ
dṛṣṭvā puro'tha yavanaṃ yavanatrikoṭyā |
tvaṣṭrā vidhāpya puramāśu payodhimadhye
tatrā'tha yogabalata: svajanānanaiṣī: ||9||
aṣṭādaśe-asya	eighteenth his
samare samupeyuṣi	battle (attack) was immanent
tvaṃ dṛṣṭvā pura:-atha	Thou seeing him in front then
yavanaṃ yavana-trikoṭyā	the Yavana king with 3 crore Yavanas
tvaṣṭrā vidhāpya	by Vishwakarma getting built
puram-āśu	a city, soon
payodhi-madhye	in the middle of the sea
tatra-atha yoga-balata:	there then, by Thy yogic powers
sva-janān-anaiṣī:	Thy people took (there)
The eighteenth attack by Jaraasandha was immanent and Thou saw the Yavana king in front with 3 crore Yavanas. Thou soon got a city built in the middle of the sea by Vishwakarmaa and had Thy people transferred there, by Thy Yogic power.
padabhyāṃ tvāṃ padmamālī cakita iva purānnirgato dhāvamāno
mleccheśenānuyāto vadhasukṛtavihīnena śaile nyalaiṣī: |
suptenāṃghryāhatena drutamatha mucukundena bhasmīkṛte'smin
bhūpāyāsmai guhānte sulalitavapuṣā tasthiṣe bhaktibhāje ||10||
padabhyāṃ tvaṃ	by foot Thou
padmamālī	adorning a lotus garland
cakita iva	feigning fright (surprise)
purāt-nirgata: dhāvamāna:	from the city went out running
mleccha-īśena-anuyāta:	by the Yavana king, being followed (pursued)
vadha-sukṛta-vihīnena	being killed, of meritorious deeds devoid of
śaile nyalaiṣī:	into the mountain was led
suptena-aṃghryā-hatena	by him who was sleeping, was with foot kicked
drutam-atha mucukundena	soon then by Muchukunda
bhasmī-kṛte-asmin	to ashes reduced when he was (Jaraasandha)
bhūpāya-asmai guhānte	for this king, in the cave
sulalita-vapuṣā	with a charming form
tasthiṣe bhaktibhāje	manifested (Thou) for the devout
Adorned with a lotus garland, Thou ran from the city on foot feigning fright and surprise. The Yavana king who was devoid of meritorious deeds, in order to be blessed by being killed by Thee, pursued Thee. Thou then led him into the cave of a mountain, where king Muchukund lay asleep. Mistaking the king for Thee, the Yavana kicked him and was instantly reduced to ashes by the angry look of the awakened king. Thou then manifested Thyself in a charming form for the benefit of the devout king.
aikṣvāko'haṃ virakto'smyakhilanṛpasukhe tvatprasādaikakāṅkṣī
hā deveti stuvantaṃ varavitatiṣu taṃ nispṛhaṃ vīkṣya hṛṣyan |
muktestulyāṃ ca bhaktiṃ dhutasakalamalāṃ mokṣamapyāśu datvā
kāryaṃ hiṃsāviśuddhyai tapa iti ca tadā prāttha lokapratītyai ||11||
aikṣvāka:-ahaṃ	of the Ikshwaaku dynasty I (am)
virakta:-asmi-	dispassionate (I) am
akhila-nṛpa-sukhe	in the many royal pleasures
tvat-prasāda-	Thy grace
aika-kāṅkṣī	alone am desiring
hā deva-iti	O Lord! Thus
stuvantam	him who was praising Thee
vara-vitatiṣu taṃ nispṛham	for the multitudes of boons him desire less
vīkṣya hṛṣyan	seeing and so gladdened (Thou)
mukte:-tulyāṃ ca bhaktiṃ	liberation, like, and Bhakti
dhuta-sakala-malāṃ	(which) washes off all sins
mokṣam-api-āśu datvā	liberation also soon conferred
kāryaṃ hiṃsā-viśuddhyai	should do (penance) for purifying the deed of having caused pain
tapa iti ca tadā	penance thus and then
prāttha loka-pratītyai	(Thou) said for the world's instruction
I am of the Ikshwaaku dynasty, O Lord! I am dispassionate towards the many royal pleasures. My only desire is for Thy grace.' Thus he said praising Thee. Thou were greatly gladdened to see that the king did not seek any of the multitude of boons. Thou conferred on him Bhakti which is as good as or equal to Mukti (liberation). Thou also conferred on him liberation which washes off all sins. Yet to set an example for the world, Thou told him to do penance to purify the deeds of having caused pain to people during his rule.
tadanu mathurāṃ gatvā hatvā camūṃ yavanāhṛtāṃ
magadhapatinā mārge sainyai: pureva nivārita: |
caramavijayaṃ darpāyāsmai pradāya palāyito
jaladhinagarīṃ yāto vātālayeśvara pāhi mām ||12||
tadanu mathurāṃ gatvā	there after going to Mathura
hatvā camūṃ	destroying the army
yavana-āhṛtāṃ	brought by the Yavana
magadhapatinā	by the king of Magadha (Jaraasandha)
mārge sainyai: purā-iva	on the way with armies like before
nivārita:	being stopped
carama-vijayam	the last victory
darpāya-asmai	for (his) pride for him
pradāya palāyita:	giving (and) fleeing
jaladhi-nagarīṃ yāta:	to the ocean city (Dwaarakaa) went
vātālayeśvara	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi mām	save me
After that, going to Mathura Thou destroyed the army brought by the Yavana while on Thy way, like before, the armies of the king of Magadha (Jaraasandha) obstructed Thee. To inflate his pride, Thou gave him the last (eighteenth) victory by fleeing to the ocean city of Dwaarakaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! save me.